# Project: Data Lake
---
### 1. Introduction
A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app. </br>
This project is to build an ETL pipeline that extracts company's data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

## 2. Project Dataset
Project dataset contains two datasets that reside in S3. Here are the S3 links for each:
- Song data: `s3://udacity-dend/song_data`
- Log data: `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`

### Song dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset. </br>

- Example of JSON file in song dataset: </br>
`{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}`

### Log dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.
- Example of log file: </br>
`{"artist": "Pavement", "auth": "Logged in", "firstName": "Sylvie", "gender": "F", "itemInSession": 0, "lastName": "Cruz", "length": 99.16036, "level": "free", "location": "Washington", "method": "PUT", "page": "NextSong", "Registration": 1.540266e+12, "SessionId": 345, "song": "Mercy: The laundromat", "status": 200, "ts": 1541990258796, "userAgent": "Mozilla\5.0", "userId": 10}`

## 3. Database Schema
Using the song and event datasets, I created a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. </br>

**Fact Table**
1. **songplays** - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`
    - *songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent*


**Dimension Tables**
2. **users** - users in the app
    - *user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level* </br>
3. **songs** - songs in music database
    - *song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration* </br>
4. **artists** - artists in music database
    - *artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude* </br>
5. **time** - timestamps of records in **songplays** broken down into specific units
    - *start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday* </br>


## 4. Project Files
1. `etl.py` Reads data from S3, processes that data using Spark, and writes them back to S3 </br>
2. `dl.cfg` AWS credentials to access the AWS S3 bucket</br>
3. `data-lake-notebook.ipynb` The notebook contains ETL code runs on Spark cluster on AWS EMR cluster mode. For detailed configuration of EMR cluster, check https://docs.aws.amazon.com/emr/latest/ManagementGuide/emr-managed-notebooks.html
4. `data` is as the same form of file hierarchy as the data on S3 bucket.



## 5.How to Use
- Enter your AWS Credential in `dl.cfg` for setting up the configuration environment, check https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-configure-files.html for detailed information.</br>

- Run `python etl.py` in terminal, make sure you have all the dependencies and modules listed on the top of the py file. It will load data from `input_data` which is a path-style URL, and write the result to `output_data` which is your target S3 bucket URL. </br>For detailed S3 bucket documentation, check https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonS3/latest/dev/UsingBucket.html#access-bucket-intro
